Once around the great bolide of April
1966.
So this was a fireball. A bide is the
word for a particularly bright meteor, a
shooting star, but these ones are
immensely powerful. Entry of a very
large object traveling very fast into
the Earth's atmosphere. And it was the
25th of April at quart 7 Eastern
Standard Time over the eastern seabboard
of North America
seen by many many people and left a very
wide and lasting impression on quite a
few. There are a number of eyewitness
reports on the internet which you can go
and look up if you search for this and
uh they make fascinating reading with
people's personal accounts. It was very
very bright indeed. It triggered a lot
of UFO uh reports, of course, what these
things usually do these days. And Sky
and Telescope, very famous astronomy
magazine in an early edition here, had
it on its front cover with the different
photographs representing the different
stages of the fireball event. The top
one is it just on the point of exploding
and then breaking up into the fragments
in the second and the lower photograph.
There we say it was bright. It was
actually brighter than the full moon.
And astronomers measure brightness of
things in the sky in magnitudes. And
this one is ascribed a magnitude of
minus5.
Now the magnitude scale is all the fault
of the ancient Greeks.
They classified stars as magnitude one
if they were the brightest, 2, three,
four, five, and six for the faintest
that they could see. So that's five
steps from one to six. There are six
fence posts and five fence panels if you
think about it. And it turns out that
that dynamic range is a factor of 100 in
brightness when we actually had accurate
ways of measuring these things. And so
with five equal steps spread over a
factor of 100, it turns out that the
each step is the fifth root of 100,
which is 2.52.
And so roughly two two and a half as the
factor between each step. And it's also
backwards so that bright things have
lower numbers. And we now know that
there are some of the brightest stars
that are not magnitude one but really
should be magnitude zero or even
negative magnitudes in the case of stars
like Sirius which I think is -1.4.
Uh the full moon is -12.5
and this was -15. So it's 2 1/2 steps of
2 1/2 times brighter. And of course, the
sun, if you want to know, is -23.
That's uh just way off the scale of all
the others really. Now, this was so
bright that it caused constonation. It
dazzled millions of people according to
the press. Um it brought a baseball game
to a grinding halt and uh everybody was
just so stunned by the enormity of the
event.
Life magazine covered it. It was very
famous. And there are some photographs
here of the meteor breaking up uh
entering the atmosphere on the left,
leaving a trail in the center there.
It's exploding. And then we have the
shower of fragments later on as it uh
broke up into a shotgun blast as it came
down. This is George Gambino's two
photographs really catching the event in
detail here. and uh he took that with
his six millimeter Bolex camera. He said
it looked like a fiery sphere with a
twisted tail appeared to flicker and
disintegrated into separate beads of
light. And that's absolutely right. We
know that these things are loosely held
together and the shock of entering the
atmosphere increases rapidly as these
high-speed objects punch through the
thicker parts of the atmosphere faster
than the speed of sound. The supersonic
shock waves that are created can tear
them apart and frequently the whole
object explodes in the air into a lot of
smaller pieces, most of which burn up
and then make it to the ground.
This is Donna Deor's
photo um and uh just saying it looked
like a ball that he'd put gasoline on
and lit on fire. uh appeared to break in
two just before it went out of sight.
An entry photograph over Manhattan here.
William Copeland caught the fireball
showing the long trail across the sky
behind there in a sky that's obviously a
fairly bright combination of the last
embers of uh sunset perhaps and the uh
city lights I suppose. Now, the trail
and the light, most of what you're
seeing there is the air ionized by the
friction and the rapid passage of the
meteorite or meteor or fireball. And uh
this is a common thing that it's really
the air that you are seeing glowing and
that's why you get this very long tail
behind. Um the ionization of the air
takes a while to recombine and give out
the light.
Very widely studied. There's a paper
here from the Royal Astronomical Society
of Canada talking about the event itself
published a year and a half later in
August of 67. They estimated that the
object was an iron fragment of an
asteroid perhaps 3 to 5 m in diameter.
Now with it entering on the 25th of
April, there's also a chance that it was
part of the April fireballs, the Lirid
meteor shower, which are associated with
comet Thatcher and are mostly fragments
of comet Thatcher that have broken off
as it's been heated on its passage round
in the inner solar system near to the
sun. um and they follow around all along
its orbit and we cross that orbit in
April and so we encounter quite a lot of
these fragments but it had a very very
flat trajectory and that uh points
perhaps to it not being part of the
April liids. So we're still not quite
sure. The path was observed by enough
people to give us this track shown in
red, starting uh just uh north of
Philadelphia there over Pennsylvania and
making it across into Canada across the
border um just near Huntington in Quebec
there.
It entered round about 9 miles 15
kilometers up in the atmosphere and as I
say was was fairly flat in its
trajectory for the whole path before uh
it slowed down to the point where it
wasn't ionizing the air anymore and
sight of it was lost. But with those
observations, people have attempted to
work backwards to calculate where it
might have come from. Now obviously the
diagram there shows the sun in the
center at S and the E is Earth and the
possible paths of the comet coming in on
trajectories 1, two and three and
those [clears throat] depend on the
velocity. So it's uh number one is 18
kilometers/s, two is 17 and three is 16.
So, it's somewhere in that range and
that takes it out towards the asteroid
belt. Um, perhaps towards the orbit of
Mars. We're not quite sure. Depends
exactly on the uh assumptions that you
make. And there isn't really enough data
with this one. The relatively few people
who managed to grab a photograph of it
with a real film camera, of course, in
those days is fairly uh few and far
between. And also we're relying to a
certain extent on people's reports of
the time of hearing the sonic boom over
Pennsylvania and Massachusetts. So uh
rather thin data to be going on. But uh
anyway, very fascinating to
see such an object. I've seen a fireball
in broad daylight before and they are
quite stunning. But 1966 was the year to
be watching for these things. In
September on the 17th, another one
entered and landed near Lake Huron.
Shock waves were recorded by seismograph
and this time the orbit was back
calculated and shown to be a parabolic
orbit that seemed to uh come from
further out in the uh outer solar system
um and quite a high-speed entry.
But 1966 was also an excellent year
because of the Leonid meteors. And I've
got a relatively poor quality shot here
taken of the meteors flying through the
sky. It just shows how many of them
there were. 144,000
meteors per hour. Quite incredible
number. And these are fragments of
another comet, comet Temple Tuttle,
which we collide with headon. So the
earth is going around the sun at 18
km/s.
So anything that we hit tends to uh
acquire that velocity unless we are
going parallel to it. Um but if it's
coming headon towards us at higher speed
that the velocities add and that's
what's happening in this case. the
particles are essentially in a
retrograde orbit and collide with the
earth head on. Um, now the leonids
happen every year and the numbers that
we get are typically 40 or 50 an hour.
So roughly one a minute, maybe a bit
less. So 144,000
is an incredible outburst. And large
outbursts do seem to occur about every
33 years.
And uh the next one is predicted to be
somewhere around 2033 2034.
So a few years to wait. Now it probably
won't be as spectacular as 1966 because
that was incredibly unusual. But there
are reports back from the 17th and 18th
century of astonishing bursts of
meteors. And there are some fantastic
diagrams. Maybe we'll talk about that
another time. And so for now, I will
leave you just with this image, an
artist's impression, I must add, of uh
the college there with a fireball
hurtling across the the blue sky. Now, I
think most of the photographs show that
the sky was somewhat darker than that at
the time, but uh a remarkable event
anyway. And I made this video because a
couple of people had asked about it uh
when listening to some of my other
videos on the subject of meteors and
meteorites. Anyway, thanks very much for
listening.